---
layout: distill
title: How the structure of Arcadia Resembles a Fractal
date: 2023-03-18 16:00:00
description:
tags: clit&sci
categories: literature
citation: true

bibliography: 2023-02-19-maxwell-demon.bib
---

Tom Stoppard’s play _Arcadia_ <d-cite key="arcadia"></d-cite> has a remarkable feature of its temporal structure
intertwining the past and the present in the same space. It challenges the conventional
time sequence of narration and also employs its unique stage settings, as described
elaborately at the start of Scene Two (Stoppard 19), that “both periods must share the
state of the room, without the additions and subtractions.” These characteristics
contribute to the play’s overall structure as a composition of both resemblances and
variances which can be related to the mathematical concept of fractals. In this paper, we
will explore how the fractal structure is manifested and what’s the intention behind this
design.

The discussion on how the relationship between science and nature first shows up in
Scene 1, when Thomasina questioned if God is a Newtonian and how the formula must
exist for all the future of every atom. Her tutor, Septimus, raised the defects of the
argument by mentioning free will, God’s will, and sin but was eventually persuaded by
Thomasina (Stoppard 10). This discussion was interrupted by Charter and later brought
up in Scene 3 that “nature is written in numbers” (Stoppard 41). Thomasina’s dubiety on

why all the equations can only describe the shapes of manufacture leads her to a
beginning theory about chaotic shapes in nature. Her attempt to plot the leaf and
deduce its equation was later identified by Hannah and Valentine as an iterated
algorithm to plot in a way that “each graph is a small section of the previous one, blown
up” (Stoppard 48). This is a fractal that exhibits self-similarity on increasingly smaller
scales.<d-cite key="fractal"></d-cite> (Gouyet) This way of modeling the irregularities of nature is interpreted by
Valentine as plotting a picture of turbulence: “growth—change—creation” (Stoppard 51).
We need fractals because “the future is disorder” (Stoppard 52). This direct reference to
fractals introduces a scientific context to the play which connects the early nineteenth
century and the present day when both discuss the applications of fractals, one is for
plotting a leaf and the other is to calculate the grouse numbers. It also reveals the point
of view of Stoppard on fractals and hence is helpful for us to relate the play’s fractal
structure to grander themes.

Now with the concepts of fractals elucidated, we can look into the places where the
structure of fractals manifests throughout the play. Apart from the fractals theory itself
recurring throughout the play, the storylines of two different time periods also reflect
the idea that patterns can repeat at different scales, creating complex and unpredictable
systems like a fractal. For example, in Scene 2, Bernard asserted that the poet Charter
was killed in a duel with Lord Byron, which is refuted by our knowledge that Charter
didn’t manage to have a duel with Septimus and further detailed in the following scene
when we go back in time that Charter succeeded in challenging Septimus to a duel. This
magnification of details on the same subject is the exact feature of a fractal. The same is

in Scene 5, in which Bernard was connecting Byron with the critic of Charter’s work and
the note that suggested an affair with Mrs. Charter found in Byron’s possession of
Charter’s book (Stoppard 59) with his made-up “lost but ineradicable letter” written by
Byron to Septimus (Stoppard 61), the complexity of the notes and letters that the
present day characters used as evidence was later revealed in Scene 6, and so is the myth
of Charter’s death. There was indeed a burned, lost letter written by Byron to Septimus
that was “never to be read by a living soul” (Stoppard 75) and Byron was also found out
to have an affair with Mrs. Charter (Stoppard 72). But, Charter’s death is unrelated to
Lord Byron as his identity as the botanist who died from a monkey bite was revealed.
The recurring elements in both the present’s deduction and the past’s truth form a sense
of certainty out of disorder coupled with the unpredictability of what already happened
and is counted as history. The complex patterns that construct the chaos and confusion
of information resemble the complexity in a fractal.

What really pushes the play to a climax is in Scene 7, where both time periods coexist on
the stage, showing the interwoven structure visually to the audience. The switch back
and forth in time becomes faster and faster and reaches its maxima when Lady Croom
and Chloe, two characters in two different timelines, were entering and exiting the room
at the same time looking for a missing person, leading to the “unendurable noise” and
chaos (Stoppard 86-87). The end of the play shows three couples on the stage at the
same time — Thomasina and Septimus, Chloe and Bernard, and Hannah and Gus —
again contributing to the self-similarity feature of different scales. This final scene’s
coexistence of different time periods visually displays Stoppard’s theory of underlying
orders in unpredictable randomness by creating a sense of chaos while maintaining
patterns in characters and settings. The fractal’s expanding symmetry at various scales
(Gouyet) is hence manifested in such a way.

The intention behind this structure may be referred back to the concepts of fractals.
Since fractals are mathematical models to simulate “how nature creates itself” (Stoppard
51), attempting to mathematically regulate and explain future randomness. This overall
structure of a fractal relates to the sense of incompleteness of truth and history as more
details with similar patterns would emerge and challenge the view of the previous more
distant scale. Fractals also give rise to a sense of repetition and interconnectedness that
unite the two time periods in all ways. With the constant noise and confusion in plots
and characters, we see characters probing for different answers with the inevitable loss
and errors of information, but as Hannah said “it’s wanting to know that makes us
matter” (Stoppard 80), the effort to understand what’s assured to be unpredictable is
what fractals are created for— the determinism in disorder. Hence, _Arcadia_ offers an
optimistic view on our doomed fate (Stoppard 69) to be cold to death (Stoppard 82) that
studying our history still helps us to figure out complex patterns out of increasing chaos
and this inquiry of knowing that embraces uncertainties is what sustains us to create a
given scaled window of order and meanings.
